[slottable-request] Initial draft (#45)
webcomponents-cg/community-protocols: proposals/slottable-request.md

# Slottable Request Protocol
aka "Render Props for Web Components"

**Author**: Kevin Schaaf (@kevinpschaaf, Google)

**Status**: Draft

**Last Updated**: 2023-08-28

# Background

There are often use cases that require a component to render UI based on data, but where the specific rendering of the data should be controllable by the user. Use cases of this include:

*   A data table or tree component, which manages the rendering of cells or tree nodes, but where the given look and feel of the items is customizable by the user.

> *   A virtual list component, which optimizes rendering a list of data by only rendering a subset of user-templated items based on which array instances are visible on the screen.

Reviewer: This virtual list does not use this pattern: https://github.com/WICG/virtual-scroller

Worth reviewing why they came to the decision not to.

Reviewer 2: The virtual-scroller effort is defunct, but even so it did seem to follow a _very_ similar pattern where the container fires an event to tell the host to render new content: https://github.com/WICG/virtual-scroller#rangechange-event

Can you say what you think the important differences are?

Reviewer: It's unclear to me how the event-listener is intended to provide the content. Inline examples would help clarify this for me.

> *   Components that fetch data themselves, but provide the ability for the user to customize the rendering of the data.

Reviewer 2: One use case I'd like to see mentioned is for deferred rendering. ie, a tooltip or menu component might to render some user-provided DOM, but only rarely and on-demand. Using this protocol to trigger that render would reduce the number of elements unnecessarily rendered.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, this should be  noted as part of the fundamental motivation. In particular, I believe this protocol addresses *most* of the [`slot` related criticisms levied by Vue](https://vuejs.org/guide/extras/web-components.html#web-components-vs-vue-components):
1. Slottable content can be rendered _lazily_, based on receiving the `slottable-request` event. It no longer needs to be rendered _eagerly_.
2. Data can be passed to the slottable content generator to be used during rendering.

Author: Added.

This proposal describes an interoperable protocol for components to request that their owning context render slotted content into themselves, using data provided via the protocol.

# Goals

*   The ability for users of a component to render requested content using a templating system of their choice, using data supplied by the component.

> *   The ability for requested content to be logically composed by the requesting component into the component's shadow root at a position of its choice.

Reviewer 2: This one doesn't read very clearly to me. Do you meant that the rendered content can have slot attributes?

Author: It's just trying to say that, while the provider gets to provide the content, the requestor gets control over "where" it goes.

Slots is how we fulfill the requirement in the protocol, but this requirement alone could be satisfied by e.g. providing a function that returns DOM (but that wouldn't meet the other requirements). 

Maybe this is clearer?
```suggestion
*   The ability for requested content to be rendered into the requesting component's shadow root at a position of its choice.
```

Author: Reworded.

*   The ability for requested content to be styled in the same "user" scope the component in question was created in, and using styling mechanisms of the user's choice.

> *   The ability to implement the protocol inside framework-specific wrappers or helpers that expose a user API that looks similar or identical to framework-specific patterns (i.e. "render props" for React).

Reviewer: This proposal is missing the goal that the component should be usable outside of a framework, aka with plain JS. That should be added as a goal.

Author: Added, thanks.

# Design / Proposal

## Protocol Definition

Concretely, the protocol involves dispatching a well-known DOM event to request slotted content (aka "[slottables](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#light-tree-slotables)", per the DOM spec) be rendered with the provided `data` argument and assigned to the given `slotName`:

```ts

> export class SlotableRequestEvent<Name extends string, T = unknown> extends Event {

Reviewer 4: needs two tt for _Slotable_?

Author: Done

  readonly data: T | typeof remove;
  readonly name: Name;
  readonly slotName: string;
  constructor(name: Name, data: unknown, key?: string) {
    super('slottable-request', {bubbles: false, composed: false});
    this.name = name;
    this.data = data;
    this.slotName = key !== undefined ? `${name}.${key}` : name;
  }
}

export const remove = Symbol('slottable-request-remove');
```

> When a component wants to render customizable content, it (1) fires a `slottable-request` event for a given slot name, and (2) renders a `<slot>` element into its shadow root corresponding to the requested slot name.

Reviewer: What happens if the component is defined before the parent component has been defined? It will miss these events.

One solution here is to have an imperative API, such as a function that you can call, to cause a render to occur.

Author: Could you explain who would call the imperative API, and how they would know call it?

Slotting is really a form of dependency injection, and it does get tricky when the owning scope isn't available to provide dependencies. We've dealt with this in the context protocol at an implementation level by having an "unfulfilled context request" manager at the root re-dispatch context requests from consumers to providers [see discussion](https://github.com/webcomponents-cg/community-protocols/issues/25#issuecomment-1105862016). We haven't standardized that into the protocol, but we implement it in Lit to pretty good effect, and I could see something like that forming a solution.

Reviewer: It's unclear to me how the event-listener is intended to provide the content. Inline examples would help clarify this for me.

Each time the `slottable-request` event is received, the user should use the provided `data` to render (or update) slotted content into the component that fired the event, where each top-level child rendered for a given request is assigned to the provided `slotName`. The `name` field on the event is used to determine what type of content to render; each unique `name` will generally map to a specific user-managed template. 

> Because components may request multiple slotted instances for the same conceptual `name` (for example, in the case of a 'list-item` slot request), the `slotName` may differ from the `name`. Thus, `name` should be used to select which template to render, and `slotName` should be assigned to the given rendered _instance_ and used as a unique key to identify which instance to update for subsequent requests.

Reviewer 5: Looks like a malformatted markdown tick.

```suggestion
Because components may request multiple slotted instances for the same conceptual `name` (for example, in the case of a `list-item` slot request), the `slotName` may differ from the `name`. Thus, `name` should be used to select which template to render, and `slotName` should be assigned to the given rendered _instance_ and used as a unique key to identify which instance to update for subsequent requests.
```

Author: Thanks!

When requesting a specific slot instance, the event accepts an optional 3rd `key` argument; this is used to generate a unique `slotName` by suffixing the `name` with `key`.

The `remove` symbol is provided as a sentinel value for `data` to indicate that the given content assigned to `slotName` should be removed, and should be fired when the associated `<slot>` is no longer rendered to avoid leaking light-DOM children.

> ## Examples

Reviewer: Code examples here would be good.

Author: The playground links are code examples -- were you looking for inline code snippets? They got a bit long and distracting so moved them to playground.

Reviewer: Yes, outside links are fine too, but linkrot exists so there should be inline examples to view, and having a condensed version is a good exercise to see if the API scales down to simpler cases.

Reviewer: Also, all of these examples are using a framework, so it's harder to tell what is going on unless you understand the internals of what the framework is doing. So one or two plain JS examples would be good.

*   The ability to implement the protocol inside framework-specific wrappers or helpers that expose a user API that looks similar or identical to framework-specific patterns (i.e. "render props" for React).
*   The ability to provide slotted content lazily for better performance, since the component may defer rendering slotted content based on the state of the component.

# Design / Proposal

## Protocol Definition

Concretely, the protocol involves dispatching a well-known DOM event to request slotted content (aka "[slottables](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#light-tree-slotables)", per the DOM spec) be rendered with the provided `data` argument and assigned to the given `slotName`:

```ts
export class SlottableRequestEvent<Name extends string, T = unknown> extends Event {
  readonly data: T | typeof remove;
  readonly name: Name;
  readonly slotName: string;
  constructor(name: Name, data: unknown, key?: string) {
    super('slottable-request', {bubbles: false, composed: false});
    this.name = name;
    this.data = data;
    this.slotName = key !== undefined ? `${name}.${key}` : name;
  }
}

> export const remove = Symbol('slottable-request-remove');

Reviewer 6: Given that `remove` is a short, common identifier, we may want to consider exposing this as a static symbol like `SlottableRequestEvent.remove`.
